Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab.
This is a free, complete course for the CCNA
200-301.
If you like these videos, please subscribe
to follow along with the series.
Also, please like and leave a comment, and
share the video to help spread this free series
of videos.
Thanks for your help.
Let’s get started.
In this lab we’ll configure IP addresses
on a Cisco router.
This is like the demo topology I used in Day
8’s main video, I just changed the IP addresses.
We still have one class A network, 15.0.0.0/8,
one class B network, 182.98.0.0/16, and one
class C network, 201.191.20.0/24.
Let’s get started.
The first step is to configure R1’s hostname.
I haven’t done any configurations yet on
R1, so it still has the default hostname of
‘router’.
Let’s go on to the CLI of R1.
Now I’ll use enable to enter privileged
exec mode.
Then, to configure the hostname, we have to
be in global config mode, so ‘conf t’.
Now let’s set the hostname.
Hostname R1.
Okay, you can see the prompt changes to display
the new hostname.
That’s all for step 1.
Step 2 is to use a ‘show’ command to view
a list of R1’s interfaces, their IP addresses,
status, etc.
Do you remember what command that is?
It’s a very helpful command which you’ll
use a lot as you configure Cisco routers.
It’s show ip interface brief.
But as you can see, the command doesn’t
work.
Why is that?
Well, its because ‘show’ commands are
normally done from privileged exec mode.
However, let me use the ‘up’ arrow to
return to the previous command, then I’ll
use the shortcut ‘control A’, so hold the
control key and press A, and then cursor returns
to the beginning of the line.
Then, type ‘do’ in front of the command,
and now it lets me enter the command from
global config mode.
Now you can see a list of interfaces,
their IP addresses, which are unset at
the moment, and their statuses.
Remember, the ‘status’ column indicates
the Layer 1 status.
Currently their status is administratively
down, because Cisco router interfaces have
the ‘shutdown’ command applied to them
by default.
The protocol column indicates the layer 2
status of the interface.
Because layer 1 is shutdown, layer 2 cant
operate, so they are all down.
We will configure gigabitethernet0/0, 0/1,
and 0/2 in this lab, so they should all become
UP, UP afterwards.
Step 3 is to configure the appropriate IP
addresses on R1’s interfaces, and enable
them.
We are also instructed to configure appropriate
interface descriptions.
Let’s start on the gigabitethernet0/0 interface.
Just for this first interface, I’ll type
out the whole command.
Interface gigabitethernet 0/0.
There we go, as you can see the prompt has
changed to show that I’m in interface configuration
mode.
Let’s configure the IP address.
Once again, I’ll use the full commands for
this first interface.
Ip address 15.255.255.254, now what’s the
appropriate subnet mask for a /8 prefix length?
It’s 255.0.0.0.
Now let’s configure a description.
I’ll indicate that this interface is connected
to switch 1.
description, I'll put two hashtags, to SW1, and then again, hashtags.
You can use different descriptions if you
want, this is just how I do descriptions.
Finally, let’s enable the interface.
No shutdown.
Immediately, I get two messages indicating
that the interface has come up.
Before checking on the status of the interface,
I’ll configure the other two interfaces.
To switch to configuring another interface,
I don’t have to exit back to global config
mode first.
I can just type ‘interface g0/1’, and now I’m
in interface config mode for gigabitethernet
0/1.
Let’s set the IP address.
IP address 182.98.255.254.
The subnet mask for a /16 prefix length is
255.255.0.0.
And the description.
Description ## to SW2 ##. Let’s enable it.
No shut.
Okay, now let’s go to the last interface.
Int g0/2.
Ip address 201.191.20.254, and the subnet mask
for a /24 prefix length is 255.255.255.0.
Next, the description.
Description ## to SW3 ##. Finally, let’s
enable it.
No shut.
Okay, since we’re done with the configurations
I’ll use the command ‘end’ to go back
to privileged exec mode.
Alternatively, I could have used the ‘exit’
command twice.
Once to return to global config mode, and
then a second time to return to privileged
exec mode.
Now let’s check on the status of the interfaces.
Show ip interface brief.
Now you can see the IP addresses we configured,
the method lists ‘manual’ instead of unset,
and the layer 1 and layer 2 statuses of the
interfaces are up and up.
Now, step 5 says to view the running config
to confirm the changes, and then save the
config.
Show running-config.
Here are the interfaces.
You can see the descriptions, and ip addresses
we configured.
Notice the default duplex auto and speed auto
commands.
Also, if you look at the vlan1 interface,
you can see the shutdown command, which as
I said is applied by default to cisco router
interfaces.
Okay, let’s save the config.
I mentioned in a previous video that there
are a few ways to save the config.
Copy running-config startup-config.
Write memory.
Or, just write.
I like to use the shortcut version of write,
W R. There we go.
Step 6 is to configure the IP addresses of
PC1, PC2, and PC3.
I’ll go on PC1 first.  To configure the
IP address, click config up here.
First, notice that I pre-configured the gateway
here.
I’ll talk about what the purpose of the
gateway is when we talk more about routing,
but notice that its R1’s IP address.
Now, to configure the PC's IP address, click
on fastethernet0 here, that is PC1’s network
interface card.
And then here you can configure the IP address.
15.0.0.1.
And look at the subnet mask.
It automatically fills in 255.0.0.0,
since this is a class A address.
Okay, now we can exit out of here.
Let’s do the same on PC2.
Click on PC2.
Click config.
Click on fastethernet0.
The IP address is 182.98.0.1, and once again
it automatically fills in the subnet mask,
this time 255.255.0.0 because this is a class
B address.
Now let’s go on PC3.
Click on PC3.
Click config.
Fastethernet0.
IP address of 201.191.20.1.
And this time the subnet mask is 255.255.255.0,
for this class C address.
Okay, finally let’s go back to PC1 and try
to ping.  Click desktop, then command prompt.
Now I’ll try to ping PC2.
Ping 182.98.0.1.
Okay, looks like PC1 can reach PC2.
How about PC3?
Ping 201.191.20.1.
Great, PC1 can ping PC3 as well.
So, in this lab we looked at how to configure
IP addresses on router interfaces, how to
configure interface descriptions, and how
to enable interfaces with the ‘no shutdown’
command.
We also configured IP addresses on PCs in
packet tracer and confirmed reachability with
ping.
That’s all for this lab.
Thank you for watching.
Please subscribe to the channel, like the
video, leave a comment, and share the video
with anyone else studying for the CCNA.
If you want to leave a tip, check the links
in the description.
I'm also a Brave verified publisher and accept
BAT, or Basic Attention Token, tips via the
Brave browser.
That's all for now.